W-21433121 agent network 2.0 content ie (#660)
mulesoft/docs-code-builder: agent-network/2.0/modules/ROOT/pages/af-agent-script-reference.adoc

* <<a2a-namespace-functions,A2A Namespace Functions>>
* <<built-in-functions,Built-in Functions>>
* <<node-outputs,Node Outputs>>
* <<node-expressions-and-references,Node Expressions and References>>

[[agent-script-structure]]
== Agent Script Structure

The following sections explain settings and configurations specific to MuleSoft agent network projects. To learn more about Agent Script, see the https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/ai/agentforce/guide/agent-script.html[Agent Script documentation].

=== Dialect Referencing and Versioning

Agent Script files contain a header specifying the dialect and a version binding. SEMVER major and minor are used for fixing to a specific dialect version.

The dialect header specifies that the script is strictly bound to a specific version or later of the AGENTFABRIC dialect. Deploying an agent to a runtime that doesn't support this version results in an error.

* Using major.minor (for example, `AGENTFABRIC=1.1`) binds to version 1.1 or later
* Using major only (for example, `AGENTFABRIC=1`) references the latest version within that major version

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
# @dialect: AGENTFABRIC=1.0
----

=== System Section

> This section defines the `instructions` attribute, which acts as a default system prompt that will be used whenever an agentic node doesn't define a `system.instructions` of its own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines the `instructions` attribute, which acts as a default system prompt used whenever an agentic node doesn't define its own `system.instructions`.
```

|`default_llm`
|Specifies a default LLM to be used on all agentic nodes that don't specify otherwise.
|@llm reference See <<llm-section,LLM>>
|No

|===

[[llm-section]]
=== LLM Section

The `llm` element is where you define the LLMs to use for reasoning and generation. Each `target` must use the `llm://` URI scheme so the runtime binds to the correct governed connection.

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
llm:
    open-api-llm:
     target: "llm://open_ai_connection"
     kind: "OpenAI"
     model: "gpt5-mini"
     reasoning_effort: "LOW"
   gemini-llm:
     target: "llm://gemini_connection"
     kind: "Gemini"
     model: "gemini-3-flash-preview"
     thinking_level: "HIGH"
     top_p: 0.3
----

==== LLM Configuration: OpenAI

The OpenAI configuration has these properties.

The OpenAI default URL is https://api.openai.com/v1.

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`target`
|Governed LLM connection as a URI; must use the `llm://` scheme
|URI (`llm://...`)
|Yes

|`kind`
|Discriminator for the LLM provider; selects which provider-specific attributes apply
|String, `OpenAI`
|Yes

|`model`
|The name of the model to use
|String
|Yes

|`reasoning_effort`

> |Constrains effort on reasoning for reasoning models. gpt-5.1 defaults to NONE, previous ones default to MEDIUM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Constrains effort on reasoning for reasoning models. GPT-5.2 defaults to `NONE`; earlier models default to `MEDIUM`.
```

==== A2A Actions

A2A actions execute the `message/send` A2A method and do not specify inputs or outputs.

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
actions:
   hr_agent:
     target: "a2a://hr_agent_connection"
     kind: "a2a:send_message"
----

A2A actions have these properties. 

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`target`
|Governed A2A connection as a URI; must use the `a2a://` scheme
|URI (`a2a://...`)
|Yes

|`kind`
|Indicates that this executes the message/send A2A method.
|"a2a:send_message"
|Yes

|===

==== MCP Actions

MCP actions invoke Model Context Protocol actions with optional input binding.

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
actions:
   send_slack_message:
     target: "mcp://slack_mcp_connection"
     kind: "mcp:tool"
     tool_name: "send-message"
     inputs:
       channel: string = "my-default-channel"
       message: string
----

MCP actions have these properties. 

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`target`
|Governed MCP connection as a URI; must use the `mcp://` scheme
|URI (`mcp://...`)
|Yes

|`kind`

> |Constant indicating this will invoke an MCP tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Constant indicating that this invokes an MCP tool
```

|Object See <<node-outputs,Node Outputs>>
|No

|===

=== Executor Node

The executor node is used to execute a set of Agent Script statements, primarily for setting variables or deterministic tool invocations. Use this node to set variables or call actions with known or fixed arguments.

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
executor sendHrSlackUpdate:
   do: -> run @actions.send_slack_message with text=@generator.generate-hr-slack-update-message.output with channel_id="my-onboarding-channel-id"
   on_exit: -> transition to @router.countrySwitch
----

The executor node has these properties. 

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`id`
|The node identifier, defined next to the node type.
|String
|Yes

|`label`
|An optional short, human-readable display name for the node.
|String
|No

|`description`
|A CommonMark string providing a description of the node.
|String
|No

|`on_exit`
|A procedure that executes when the node execution finishes. If `on_exit` is not defined, the graph ends when the executor ends.
|Procedure, but only `transition_to` statements are allowed.
|No

|`do`
|Agent Script statements to execute
|procedure
|Yes

|===

=== Router Node

> The router node performs dynamic transitions based on deterministic conditions. This node does not support transition to in its on_exit attribute. Use this node for branching based on structured output from a previous node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The router node performs dynamic transitions based on deterministic conditions. This node doesn't support `transition to` in its `on_exit` attribute. Use this node for branching based on structured output from a previous node.
```

*Example*

[source,yaml]
----
router countryRouter:
   routes:
     - target: @orchestrator.argentinaOnboard
       when: @orchestrator.hrSystemOnboard.output.country  == "ARG"
       label: "Argentina"
     - target: @orchestrator.usOnboard
       when: @orchestrator.hrSystemOnboard.output.country  == "USA"
       label: "USA"
   otherwise:
     target: @echo.invalidCountryResponse
----

The router node has these properties.

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`id`
|The node identifier, defined next to the node type.
|String
|Yes

|`label`
|An optional short, human-readable display name for the node.
|String
|No

|`description`
|A CommonMark string providing a description of the node.
|String
|No

|`routes`
|An array of condition and target pairs, plus an optional label field for UI. Must define at least one route. Each route contains: `target`, `when`, and optional `label`.
|Array
|Yes

|`otherwise`
|Defines a default transition when no route condition matches. Contains: `target`.
|Object
|Yes with `routes`

|===

=== Echo Node

> The echo node sends a response back to the client. The number of responses depends on the trigger interface and its configuration. Use this node for the end of a workflow, or anytime you want to emit a response. Currently only supports `a2a:response` (non-streaming). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The echo node sends a response back to the client. The number of responses depends on the trigger interface and its configuration. Use this node for the end of a workflow, or anytime you want to emit a response. Agent networks currently support `a2a:response` (non-streaming) only.
```

   kind: "a2a:response"
   task: a2a.task({
     state: "completed",
     message: a2a.message({
       messageId: uuid(),
       parts: [a2a.textPart("You have been onboarded! Your employee ID is " + @orchestrator.hrSystemOnboard.output.employeeId)]
     }),
     artifacts: a2a.parts(*@variables.artifacts),
     metadata: None
   })
----

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Parameter
|Description
|Type
|Required

|`id`
|The node identifier, defined next to the node type.
|String
|Yes

|`label`
|An optional short, human-readable display name for the node.
|String
|No

|`description`
|A CommonMark string providing a description of the node.
|String
|No

|`on_exit`
|A procedure that executes when the node execution finishes. If `on_exit` is not defined, the graph ends when the agentic node loop ends.
|Procedure, but only `transition_to` statements are allowed.
|No

|`kind`
|Discriminator for the response type. Must be "a2a:response".
|String
|Yes

|`task`
|A Task object as defined in the A2A specification. The `id`, `contextId` and `history` attributes are automatically populated by the trigger
|Task object
|Yes

|===

[[a2a-namespace-functions]]
== A2A Namespace Functions

> The `a2a` namespace provides a set of functions that support A2A Task object creation. Do not prefix these functions with `@` as it's  reserved for references such as `@variables`, `@actions`, `@request`, and `@orchestrator.<nodeId>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `a2a` namespace provides a set of functions that support A2A Task object creation. Do not prefix these functions with `@` as it's reserved for references such as `@variables`, `@actions`, `@request`, and `@orchestrator.<nodeId>`.
```

[%header,cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Function
|Description
|Input arguments
|Output
|Example

|`now`
|Current UTC time in ISO 8601 format
|None
|String (ISO 8601)
|`now()`

|`uuid`
|Random UUID v4
|None
|String (UUID)
|`uuid()`

|`strip`
|Removes leading/trailing characters from a string
|String, optional chars (default: whitespace)
|String
|`strip(" hello ") -> "hello"`

|`startswith`
|Whether a string starts with a prefix
|String, prefix
|Boolean
|`startswith("hello world", "hello")`

|`endswith`
|Whether a string ends with a suffix
|String, suffix
|Boolean
|`endswith("report.pdf", ".pdf")`

|`abs`
|Absolute value
|Number
|Number
|`abs(-42)`

|`round`
|Round to optional digit count
|Number, optional `ndigits`
|Number
|`round(3.14159, 2)`

|`sum`
|Sum of a numeric list
|List
|Number
|`sum([10, 20, 30])`

|`parse_json`
|Parse a JSON string
|String (valid JSON)
|Object or array
|`parse_json('{"key": "value"}')`

|===

[[node-outputs]]
== Node Outputs

Use the `outputs` field to define the expected shape of the agent's response using a schema notation similar to a JSON schema. When provided, the agent produces output matching the defined structure for downstream parsing and processing.

> Each property maps to a field in the agent's output. The following types are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each property maps to a field in the agent's output. These types are supported.
```

*Note:* Advanced JSON schema features are not supported, so do not copy patterns from generic JSON Schema tutorials unless they match what is documented here.

[%header,cols="1,1"]
|===
|Type
|Description

|String
|Text values with optional constraints like `pattern` (regex), `minLength`, `maxLength`, and `enum` (allowed values).

|Number / Integer
|Numeric values with optional constraints like `minimum`, `maximum`, `exclusiveMinimum`, `exclusiveMaximum`, and `enum`.

|Boolean
|`True` or `False` (with optional default).

|Array
|Lists of items, where `items` define the schema for each element (can be any supported type). Supports `minItems` and `maxItems`.

|Object
|Nested structures with their own `properties` map. Supports a `required` array to specify mandatory fields.

|===

Each property definition can include:

* `type`: The data type (required).
* `description`: A human-readable explanation of the property's purpose.
* `default`: A default value if the property is omitted.

> The `outputs` definition does not support the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `outputs` definition doesn't support:
```

* `additionalProperties` or similar JSON Schema extensibility flags
* Combinators such as `anyOf`, `oneOf`, or `allOf`
* References or shared definitions (`$ref`, `$defs`)
* Composition beyond nested `object` / `array` structures as described above

[[node-expressions-and-references]]
== Node Expressions and References

Nodes access data from other parts of the workflow using expressions.

> The following references are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These references are used.
```
